__TOC__

Besides the [[Installation#Docker|Docker image]], {{wikven}} ships as a single self-contained executable that embeds MediaWiki, so you can build a site without Docker. It is available for Linux on x86_64 and arm64.

== Download ==

Download the binary for your architecture from the [https://github.com/chaotic-ground/wikven/releases latest release] and make it executable:

<syntaxhighlight lang="shell">
curl -L -o wikven https://github.com/chaotic-ground/wikven/releases/latest/download/wikven-linux-x86_64
chmod +x wikven
</syntaxhighlight>

On arm64, use <code>wikven-linux-aarch64</code>.

To track the latest commit on the main branch instead of a tagged release, use a nightly build. These are published daily as dated pre-releases tagged <code>nightly-YYYY-MM-DD</code>; pick the most recent from the [https://github.com/chaotic-ground/wikven/releases releases page], or resolve it automatically:

<syntaxhighlight lang="shell">
tag=$(curl -s https://api.github.com/repos/chaotic-ground/wikven/releases | sed -n 's/.*"tag_name": *"\(nightly-[^"]*\)".*/\1/p' | head -n1)
curl -L -o wikven "https://github.com/chaotic-ground/wikven/releases/download/$tag/wikven-linux-x86_64"
</syntaxhighlight>

== Install ==

The downloaded file already runs as-is — <code>./wikven</code> from the directory you saved it in. To run it as plain <code>wikven</code> from anywhere, install it onto your <code>PATH</code>:

<syntaxhighlight lang="shell">
sudo install wikven /usr/local/bin/
</syntaxhighlight>

Without root, install it into a personal directory that is on your <code>PATH</code> instead, such as <code>~/.local/bin</code> (<code>-D</code> creates the directory if it is missing):

<syntaxhighlight lang="shell">
install -D wikven ~/.local/bin/wikven
</syntaxhighlight>

The commands below assume it is on your <code>PATH</code>. If you skipped this step, run it as <code>./wikven</code> from the directory you downloaded it to.

== Building a site ==

Put your wikitext and a [[Configuration|.wikven.yaml]] in a <code>src/</code> directory, then build:

<syntaxhighlight lang="shell">
mkdir -p src
echo 'Hello, World!' > src/index.wikitext
wikven build
</syntaxhighlight>

The rendered site is written to <code>dist/</code>. Preview it with <code>wikven serve</code> (see [[Deploying#Preview locally|Deploying]]). The working directory defaults to the current directory; set <code>WIKVEN_WORKDIR</code> to build a project elsewhere:

<syntaxhighlight lang="shell">
WIKVEN_WORKDIR=/path/to/project wikven build
</syntaxhighlight>

The output is the same as the Docker image's: the binary embeds MediaWiki, the bundled extensions and skins, and every interface language, and it reads the same [[Configuration|.wikven.yaml]] layered over {{wikven}}'s defaults.

== Optional host tools ==

The binary renders on its own, but uses these host programs when they are present:

* '''ImageMagick''' and '''librsvg''' produce higher-quality thumbnails. Without them the binary uses the built-in GD library for raster images and serves SVG inline. See [[Images]].
* '''git''' is needed only to fetch [[Configuration#WikvenRepositories|third-party extensions and skins]].

{{note|Fetching over HTTPS, Wikimedia Commons images via InstantCommons and any [[Configuration#WikvenRepositories|third-party extensions or skins]], relies on your system's CA certificates. On a minimal system without them, install your distribution's CA bundle (for example the <code>ca-certificates</code> package). A site with only local content and images needs no network access.}}

{{prevnext|Pages|Editing sidebar}}
{{DISPLAYTITLE:Standalone binary}}
