__TOC__

{{wikven}} writes a self-contained <code>dist/</code> directory of static files, with no server or database behind it. Host it anywhere that serves static files.

== GitHub Pages ==

This workflow rebuilds and publishes the site on every push. It bakes the source with the {{wikven}} [https://github.com/chaotic-ground/wikven/tree/main/action composite action], then uploads <code>dist/</code> to Pages. Actions are pinned to a full commit SHA, not a tag, so a moved tag cannot swap them under you:

<syntaxhighlight lang="yaml">
name: Deploy
on:
  push:
    branches: [main]
permissions:
  contents: read
  pages: write
  id-token: write
jobs:
  deploy:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    environment:
      name: github-pages
      url: ${{ steps.deploy.outputs.page_url }}
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@df4cb1c069e1874edd31b4311f1884172cec0e10  # v6.0.3
      - uses: actions/configure-pages@45bfe0192ca1faeb007ade9deae92b16b8254a0d  # v6.0.0
      - uses: chaotic-ground/wikven/action@19392b75d379de9e349ef2963c11ec5545c3e6ab  # v1.0.0
        with:
          source: src
          output: dist
      - uses: actions/upload-pages-artifact@fc324d3547104276b827a68afc52ff2a11cc49c9  # v5.0.0
        with:
          path: dist
      - id: deploy
        uses: actions/deploy-pages@cd2ce8fcbc39b97be8ca5fce6e763baed58fa128  # v5.0.0
</syntaxhighlight>

Enable Pages for the repository under '''Settings → Pages → Build and deployment → Source: GitHub Actions'''. This documentation site is published this way.

{{note|A GitHub '''project''' page is served from a subdirectory (<code>username.github.io/repo/</code>). Page-to-page links keep working because {{wikven}} writes them relative, but anything that needs an absolute path must include that base path: set [[Searching|search]]'s <code>SifterSearchBundlePath</code> to <code>/repo/pagefind/</code> (this site uses <code>/wikven/pagefind/</code>). A '''user/organization''' page (served at the domain root) needs no such setting.}}

== Any static host ==

Because <code>dist/</code> is just files, you can serve it from any static host (Netlify, Cloudflare Pages, an object store like S3, or a plain web server). Build the site in your CI or locally, then point the host at the <code>dist/</code> directory, or upload its contents to the server's document root.

== Preview locally ==

Open <code>dist/index.html</code> directly, or serve the directory so links and assets resolve exactly as they will in production. {{wikven}} has a built-in <code>serve</code> command for this.

With the [[Binary|standalone binary]], it serves <code>dist/</code> on <code>http://localhost:8080</code> (override with <code>--listen</code>):

<syntaxhighlight lang="shell">
wikven serve
</syntaxhighlight>

With the Docker image, run the <code>serve</code> command and publish the port (the build output must already be in the mounted <code>dist/</code>):

<syntaxhighlight lang="shell">
docker run --rm -p 8080:8080 \
  -v "$(pwd)/dist:/workspace/dist" \
  ghcr.io/chaotic-ground/wikven serve
</syntaxhighlight>

Any static server works too, for example <code>cd dist && python3 -m http.server</code>.

{{prevnext|Searching|Troubleshooting}}
