On this page, we build a basic [[mw:en:"Hello, World!" program|Hello World]] page with {{wikven}}.
{{note|This page assumes a unix-like shell. The standalone binary is Linux-only; on macOS or Windows, use the Docker image.}}

{{wikven}} builds a static website from a directory of wikitext. There are three ways to install it: the standalone [[Installation#Binary|binary]], the [[Installation#Docker|Docker image]], or [[Installation#Build from source|built from source]]. This guide uses the binary or Docker, pick whichever you have.

; Requirement
:* the standalone [[Installation#Binary|binary]] (Linux), or [https://www.docker.com/ Docker] (any platform). See [[Installation]] to get either.

----

Create a source directory and add a wikitext file. Any file ending in <code>.wikitext</code> becomes a wiki article. Name your entry page <code>index</code> so it builds to <code>index.html</code>, the file a browser opens at the site root.

<syntaxhighlight lang="shell">
mkdir src
echo 'Hello, World!' > src/index.wikitext
</syntaxhighlight>

Then build the site. The rendered pages are written to <code>dist/</code>. Pick the tab for how you run {{wikven}}:

<tabber>
|-|Binary=
Run it in the directory that holds <code>src/</code> (see [[Installation#Binary|Installation]] to get it):
<syntaxhighlight lang="shell">
./wikven build
</syntaxhighlight>
|-|Docker=
Mount the source and output directories into the container:
<syntaxhighlight lang="shell">
docker run --rm \
  -v "$(pwd)/src:/workspace/src" \
  -v "$(pwd)/dist:/workspace/dist" \
  ghcr.io/chaotic-ground/wikven
</syntaxhighlight>
The untagged image tracks the latest build; append a release tag such as <code>:1.0.0</code> to pin a specific version.
</tabber>

Preview the site with <code>wikven serve</code>, then open <code>http://localhost:8080</code> (with Docker, see [[Deploying#Preview locally|Deploying]]). You can also open <code>dist/index.html</code> directly, though some links and assets resolve correctly only when served. To publish it online, see [[Deploying]].

== Setting the title of the site ==

For configuration, create a [[Configuration|<code>.wikven.yaml</code>]] file in your <code>src</code> directory.

<syntaxhighlight lang="shell">
cat <<EOF > src/.wikven.yaml
config:
  Sitename: My Site
EOF
</syntaxhighlight>

Build again with the same command as before, and the site is titled "My Site".

== Adding a second page ==

Every <code>.wikitext</code> file becomes a page. Add another one and link to it from the first with <code><nowiki>[[...]]</nowiki></code>:

<syntaxhighlight lang="shell">
echo 'This is the help page.' > src/Help.wikitext
echo 'Read the [[Help]].' >> src/index.wikitext
</syntaxhighlight>

Build again: the home page now links to <code>Help.html</code>, and the link works with no server. See [[Pages]] for how file names map to page titles and namespaces, and for [[Pages#Templates|templates]].

{{prevnext|Installation|Pages}}
