__TOC__

{{wikven}} runs in three ways. On Linux the standalone binary is the simplest, a single file with no Docker. On macOS or Windows, use the Docker image. Build from source if you want to modify {{wikven}} or run an unreleased version.

== Binary ==

A single self-contained executable that embeds MediaWiki, for Linux on x86_64 and arm64. Download it and make it executable:

<syntaxhighlight lang="shell">
curl -L -o wikven https://github.com/chaotic-ground/wikven/releases/latest/download/wikven-linux-x86_64
chmod +x wikven
</syntaxhighlight>

On arm64, use <code>wikven-linux-aarch64</code>. See [[Binary|Standalone binary]] for installing it onto your <code>PATH</code>, nightly builds, and the optional host tools it uses.

== Docker ==

Works on any platform with [https://www.docker.com/ Docker], so it is the option to use on macOS and Windows. The image is published to the GitHub Container Registry:

<syntaxhighlight lang="shell">
docker pull ghcr.io/chaotic-ground/wikven
</syntaxhighlight>

The untagged image tracks the latest build; append a release tag such as <code>:1.0.0</code> to pin a specific version.

== Build from source ==

To modify {{wikven}} or run an unreleased commit, clone the repository and build the image yourself:

<syntaxhighlight lang="shell">
git clone https://github.com/chaotic-ground/wikven.git
cd wikven
docker build -t wikven .
</syntaxhighlight>

This produces a local <code>wikven</code> image you run exactly like the published one. To build the standalone binary from source instead, see [https://github.com/chaotic-ground/wikven/blob/main/Dockerfile.binary <code>Dockerfile.binary</code>].

----

Once you have {{wikven}}, head to [[Getting Started]] to build your first site.

{{prevnext|Getting Started|Binary}}
