__TOC__

Each file in your source directory becomes a page. {{wikven}} derives the page's title, and namespace, from the file's path, so the file name is how you choose them.

== From file name to page ==

A file ending in <code>.wikitext</code> becomes a wiki page whose title is the path with <code>.wikitext</code> removed, so <code>src/Help.wikitext</code> is the page "Help", served at <code>Help.html</code>.

Titles are kept as written: spaces stay spaces (name the file <code>Getting Started.wikitext</code>, not with an underscore), and the first letter keeps its case. Name your entry page <code>index</code> so it builds to <code>index.html</code>, the file a static host serves at the site root.

If a file name does not map cleanly to a title (MediaWiki would normalise it differently), the build warns, because the page's edit and history links are derived from the file name and would otherwise not resolve. Rename the file to a title that is already normalised.

== Linking between pages ==

Link with <code><nowiki>[[Title]]</nowiki></code>, or <code><nowiki>[[Title|label]]</nowiki></code>, the standard {{ml|Help:Links|wikitext link}}. {{wikven}} rewrites these to the matching <code>.html</code> paths in the static output, so internal links work with no server.

== Subpages ==

Put a file in a subdirectory to create a {{ml|Help:Subpages|subpage}}: <code>src/Guide/Setup.wikitext</code> becomes the page "Guide/Setup".

== Namespaces ==

Prefix the file name with a namespace to place the page there:

* <code>Template:Infobox.wikitext</code> is the template "Template:Infobox" (see [[#Templates]]).
* <code>File:Logo.png.wikitext</code> is the description page for an uploaded <code>Logo.png</code> (see [[Images]]).
* <code>MediaWiki:Common.css</code> and <code>MediaWiki:Common.js</code> are the site-wide stylesheet and script (see [[JavaScript]]). These keep their extension and need no <code>.wikitext</code> marker, because the name already carries the content type.

== Categories ==

Add <code><nowiki>[[Category:Name]]</nowiki></code> to a page to {{ml|Help:Categories|categorise}} it; the categories show in the page footer, as on any wiki.

A category's own page is not exported by default, though. {{wikven}} writes only ''content'' pages to the static site, and counts just the main and File: namespaces as content. (Namespaces have numeric IDs: main is <code>0</code>, File: is <code>6</code>, and Category is <code>14</code>.) So a footer category links to a <code>Category:Name.html</code> the static host does not serve, a dead link, until you export the category page. To do that, set <code>ContentNamespaces</code> in your [[Configuration#ContentNamespaces|<code>.wikven.yaml</code>]] and add a <code>Category:Name.wikitext</code> file to your source:

<syntaxhighlight lang="yaml">
config:
  ContentNamespaces: [0, 6, 14]
</syntaxhighlight>

This key replaces the default rather than extending it, so keep <code>0</code> and <code>6</code> in the list, or the main and File: pages stop being exported.

To keep a maintenance or tracking category out of the footer instead, add the <code><nowiki>__HIDDENCAT__</nowiki></code> {{ml|Help:Magic words|magic word}} to its category page; a static export has no logged-in readers, so a hidden category is off the footer for everyone.

== Templates ==

Put a <code>Template:Name.wikitext</code> file in your source and use it on any page as <code><nowiki>{{Name}}</nowiki></code>. For example, this file:

<syntaxhighlight lang="wikitext">
'''Note:''' {{{1}}}
</syntaxhighlight>

saved as <code>Template:Note.wikitext</code> and used on a page as:

<syntaxhighlight lang="wikitext">
{{Note|Back up your wiki first.}}
</syntaxhighlight>

renders as "'''Note:''' Back up your wiki first." Templates take positional (<code><nowiki>{{{1}}}</nowiki></code>) and named parameters and run {{ml|Help:Parser functions|parser functions}} exactly as in MediaWiki; this site's own pages transclude a <code>Template:wikven</code> that renders "{{wikven}}". The syntax itself is standard MediaWiki; see {{ml|Help:Templates}}.

{{prevnext|Getting Started|Editing sidebar}}
