__TOC__

{{wikven}} can build a site in more than one language using MediaWiki's {{ml|Help:Extension:Translate|Translate extension}}. Translate normally expects translators to work in an in-wiki editor, which a static build has no room for, so {{wikven}} drives it from your source tree instead: you translate by adding files and committing them, the same way you write any other page.

== Enabling translation ==

Add <code>Translate</code> to <code>extensions</code> in your [[Configuration|<code>.wikven.yaml</code>]], along with <code>UniversalLanguageSelector</code>, which Translate depends on. Both are bundled in the {{wikven}} image, so there is nothing to install.

<syntaxhighlight lang="yaml">
extensions:
  - UniversalLanguageSelector
  - Translate
</syntaxhighlight>

A static export cannot serve UniversalLanguageSelector's runtime webfonts (they load from a live endpoint), so {{wikven}} turns them off; readers see each script in their own system fonts.

You do not list the languages you translate into: as with Translate itself, a language exists as soon as a translation for it does. The language you write your pages in stays the source language.

== Marking a page for translation ==

Wrap the parts of a page that should be translated in <code><nowiki><translate></nowiki></code> tags, add <code><nowiki><languages/></nowiki></code> where you want the language bar, and give each unit a <code><nowiki><!--T:n--></nowiki></code> marker. This is Translate's own {{ml|Help:Extension:Translate/Page translation administration|page-translation markup}}:

<syntaxhighlight lang="wikitext">
<languages/>
<translate>
<!--T:1-->
{{wikven}} builds static sites from MediaWiki.

<!--T:2-->
It runs a real MediaWiki at build time.
</translate>
</syntaxhighlight>

You do not number the units by hand. Wrap the content in <code><nowiki><translate></nowiki></code> and add <code><nowiki><languages/></nowiki></code>, then run <code>translate mark</code> to insert the <code><nowiki><!--T:n--></nowiki></code> markers, mounting your source directory writable:

<syntaxhighlight lang="console">
$ docker run --rm -v "$PWD/src:/workspace/src" ghcr.io/chaotic-ground/wikven translate mark --all
</syntaxhighlight>

Pass a single file instead of <code>--all</code> to mark just that page. Marking is idempotent and stable: it keeps the numbers already there and only adds markers for new units, so re-run it whenever you add content. The numbers are the unit identity; a translation references them to line its units up with the source. The build renders the language bar and, for each language, a page at <code>Page/lang</code>.

== Adding a translation ==

A translation lives next to the page, named <code><Page>/<lang>.wikitext</code>: the Korean translation of <code>Intro.wikitext</code> is <code>Intro/ko.wikitext</code>. Generate its skeleton with <code>translate scaffold</code>, which writes an empty <code><nowiki><!--T:n--></nowiki></code> marker for every source unit and lists each unit's source text as a guide:

<syntaxhighlight lang="console">
$ docker run --rm -v "$PWD/src:/workspace/src" ghcr.io/chaotic-ground/wikven translate scaffold ko Intro.wikitext
</syntaxhighlight>

Pass <code>--all</code> in place of a file to scaffold every translatable page. Re-running is safe: it keeps what you have translated and only appends markers for new units.

Then fill each unit's translation under its marker:

<syntaxhighlight lang="wikitext">
<!--T:1-->
위크벤은 미디어위키로 정적 사이트를 만듭니다.

<!--T:2-->
빌드 시 실제 미디어위키를 실행합니다.
</syntaxhighlight>

A unit left empty counts as not yet translated: <code>translate check</code> reports it and the build renders it in the source language, so you can translate a page a few units at a time. The <code>@a1b2c3d4</code> stamp is added by <code>translate stamp</code> (see below), not by hand.

== Stamping ==

After translating, run <code>translate stamp</code> so every up-to-date unit records the source version it matches. Mount your source directory writable:

<syntaxhighlight lang="console">
$ docker run --rm -v "$PWD/src:/workspace/src" ghcr.io/chaotic-ground/wikven translate stamp --all
</syntaxhighlight>

Pass a single file instead of <code>--all</code> to stamp just that translation.

== Keeping translations up to date ==

When you change a source unit, its translations no longer match their stamp and are '''out of date'''. {{wikven}} does not hide this:

* In the built site, an out-of-date unit is marked as an outdated translation, exactly as it would be on a wiki running Translate.
* <code>translate check</code> reports every out-of-date or missing translation, and with <code>--gate</code> exits non-zero so continuous integration can fail the build:

<syntaxhighlight lang="console">
$ docker run --rm -v "$PWD/src:/workspace/src" ghcr.io/chaotic-ground/wikven translate check --gate
::warning file=src/Intro/ko.wikitext::Stale translation unit T:2 (ko)
</syntaxhighlight>

A companion GitHub Action runs the same check on pull requests. To bring a translation back up to date, edit it to match the new source, then <code>translate stamp</code> it again.

{{prevnext|Searching|Deploying}}
