__TOC__

Common problems and what to check.

== Thumbnails look low quality ==

The [[Standalone binary|standalone binary]] falls back to the built-in GD library, which produces lower-quality thumbnails and supports fewer formats. Install '''ImageMagick''' and '''librsvg''' on the build host for better output, or use the Docker image, which bundles them. See [[Images]].

== The search box does nothing ==

Search is client-side, built into {{wikven}} via SifterSearch and on by default. If the box does not respond, search was turned off (an empty <code>SifterSearchOutputDir</code>), or its bundle path does not match where the site is served (set <code>SifterSearchBundlePath</code> for a subdirectory deploy). See [[Searching]].

== A page is missing from the site ==

The build aborts if any page fails to import, printing <code>Failed to import N page(s)</code> with the file names. A common cause is a file whose name does not map to a valid title; rename it (the build warns when a name does not round-trip). Re-run the build and read the log for the failing file.

== Fetching fails over HTTPS ==

Fetching Wikimedia Commons images and [[Configuration#WikvenRepositories|third-party extensions or skins]] needs your system's CA certificates. On a minimal host without them (common with the standalone binary), install your distribution's CA bundle, for example the <code>ca-certificates</code> package. A site with only local content and images needs no network access.

== The binary will not run on macOS or Windows ==

The standalone binary is Linux-only (x86_64 and arm64). On macOS or Windows, use the Docker image instead. See [[Installation]].

{{prevnext|Deploying|Configuration}}
